ASCEND Climbing Rules & Etiquette | Safety Guidelines & Best Practices - ASCEND Climbing
Rules + Etiquette
It's how you act
Rules
Rules?! There are no rules in climbing, right? Well kind of. So here are ASCEND's:
Before climbing at ASCEND, please
watch this very important and helpful video
that addresses common safety issues and best practices at a climbing gym.
Food, beverages, and sharp objects must stay off the bouldering pads.
Street shoes and bare feet are not permitted on climbing walls.
Sober climbing is the best climbing - do not climb while intoxicated.
All climbers and visitors must complete a liability waiver before entering ASCEND.
Climbers 13 and under must be directly supervised by an adult.
You must be at least 14 to be in the fitness and training areas or to take a regularly scheduled climbing, fitness, or yoga class.
There is only one wall you can end up on the top of: the top-out wall!
Belaying requires approval from ASCEND staff.
Climbing shoes are not permitted in the bathrooms. Gross!
Climbing flooring is for falling - not walking, sitting, or horsing around.
Use caution when using the climbing walls and fitness equipment - this is not a jungle gym!
Etiquette
Etiquette schmettiquette! But seriously, let's keep everyone happy and healthy.
This is a safe space. Everyone deserves respect and compassion.
Pay attention! Other climbers may be above you or waiting to climb behind you.
Shirts are required - we promise to keep it cool.
Only spot when asked and/or trained to do so.
Politely ask before telling someone how to climb - figuring out the beta is half the challenge!
Gender does not determine skill or strength. Don't assume.
Keep your wet and muddy shoes away from the climbing areas.
Chalk belongs in your bag and on your hands.
Clean up after yourself - put away fitness equipment - wipe down machines.
Please keep in mind: Failure to adhere to the Rules & Etiquette of ASCEND can lead to the suspension of climbing and facility access privileges.
Very Important
Youth Rules + Tips
Kids LOVE and EXCEL at climbing, especially bouldering. Unfortunately, they sometimes view it as a jungle gym when in reality it is quite the opposite! We want kids to have fun, but our guests' safety is our top-priority. This is why we will strictly enforce the DIRECT SUPERVISION of any kids 13 and under. While supervising, please remember the following rules.
Please help us take safety seriously.
No running on or off the pads, but especially on the pads.
Pads are only for climbing and falling on. Do not jump around, chase anyone, or perform gymnastics.
Approach the intended climb from directly in front of the start. Do not walk on the pads to your next climb. Simply said, get on, climb, then get off.
Give other climbers at least 15 feet of space and only one climber per route.
The downclimb is only for getting off of the orange top out boulder.
Keep chalk socks inside chalk bags. Never throw chalk socks or anything else.
Fitness, cardio, and training areas are off limits for those 13 and under.
NEVER walk underneath a climber. This could result in injury or death and is the most important thing that you will read on this entire website!
If these rules are not followed, we reserve the right to ask you to leave.
ASCEND Climbing Youth Safety
Watch This Before Arriving